---
layout: post
title: books 2017
---

2017 Books
=====
I try to write down a sentence or two about the books I read, so I'm going to put those here.  List is mostly just chronological. [Last year's list][1]

[1]: /2016/01/15/2016Books/ "2016 Books"

##### *The Underground Railroad* by Colson Whitehead
Deserved all the praise it got.  Kind of magical and an amazing book.


##### *It Can’t Happen Here* by Sinclair Lewis
Novels set in a nostalgic small town America generally turn me off, but the satire of fascism was on point enough to for me to tamp down my skepticism.  The fascist foot soldiers are called Minute Men just like those white vigilantes on the border with Mexico!


##### *The Sympathizer* by Viet Thanh Nguyen
this was ok but should have been trimmed by like…a third.  


##### *Into the Woods* by Tana French
Tana French’s books are consistently great for me so far.  She writes super sharp mysteries and this one didn’t disappoint.


##### *Commonwealth* by Ann Patchett
My friend that works in publishing said this is “classic women’s lit”, and I thought it was good if not remarkable.  Patchett’s writing is compelling and the characters are pretty amazing.


##### *1491: New Revelations of the Americas Before Columbus* by Charles Mann
academic, but actually really good.  This book definitely changed what I thought Native American civilization was before Europeans arrived (also he uses the term Indians? like purposefully but he explains it obvs).


##### *Nobody Is Ever Missing* by Catherine Lacey
slightly bizarre and not the most compelling.  I had higher hopes after *The Answers*.  


##### *Conversations with Friends* by Sally Rooney
so good so good blessings to the coworker that recommended this.  It’s not really about anything except love and friendship but it’s so good.  One my faves in a long time.  I think it being about nothing is an amazing thing: it didn’t need any plot hooks because it tells a somewhat quotidian so powerfully.


##### *Pond* by Claire Louise Bennet
not really a traditional narrative, but insightful enough that I wasn’t mad about it


##### *Everything I Never Told You* by Celeste Ng
a good book.  deserves all the praise it got.


##### *Kill Anything That Moves* by Nick Turse
super bleak description of the widespread practice of American forces killing civilians in Vietnam and the military’s attempts to minimize the public relations damage.


##### *Frankenstein* by Mary Shelley
still pretty cool and scary.  old books are funny because for some reason there plot devices like “this whole thing was written down by an old sailor who had the story narrated to him!” for no reason, but Frankenstein is modern enough to be pretty entertaining.


##### *A Little Life* by Hanya Yanagihara
I loved it.  It isn't perfect, it's kind of brutal, but I loved the writing.

