---
layout: post
title: 2016 Books
---

I've always written down which books I write and tried to write a sentence or two about them.  I think maybe it will help me remember them.  Going to put those on here now.  List is mostly just chronological.


##### *Snow Crash* by Neal Stephenson
I am judging the people that recommended I read this.  It toed the line of satire but I’m pretty sure it wasn’t satirizing the things I thought it was.  At one point when the fifteen (yes fifteen) year old girl gets turned on by a warrior man ordering her to have a meal with him I think I said “what the fuck” loud enough on the train for a few people to look in my direction.

I don’t read that much science fiction, but maybe Stephenson really does have a great technological imagination.  That’s not even close to enough for me to forgive the frankly sad attempts at hyper masculinity and generally shit writing.  Sorry not sorry.


##### *A Brief History of Seven Killings* by Marlon James
By the end I understood why this book won the Booker Prize and all the others.  At the beginning it felt like a bit of a slog because of the dialect, stream of consciousness, and different narrators, but it turned out to be a pretty fucking amazing book.  Also I knew nothing about Jamaica before this and I feel like maybe I know a bit more now.


##### *Redeployment* by Phil Klay
Way better than I thought it would be.  Made me laugh out loud several times, and felt like it was trying to be honest about the people in the military, which seems like a hard thing to do.


##### *All the Single Ladies: Unmarried Women and the Rise of an Independent Nation* by Rebecca Traister
The first book about modern romance that I actually enjoyed.  Probably because it comforted me that I’m not married yet, but it also reignited some of my interest in feminism.  Traister describes a lot of historical women that chose to not to obey established norms, and how they paved the way for us to be where we are now.  


##### *Wuthering Heights* by Emily Bronte
Decided to read this because the Bronte sisters were referenced by Rebecca Traister in All the Single Ladies, and my high school English teacher never assigned this one.  It was mostly what I expected.  A little boring, very brooding, and honestly pretty ambiguous about what messages Bronte was trying to send.  I guess that’s why academics like it.


##### *The Secret Place* by Tana French
Such a good book.  It toes the line between pulp-y detective cheesiness but manages to still be really smart and modern.  I think I read it in two days on vacation and will probably read more Tana French.


##### *Alas Babylon* by Pat Frank
My Mom liked this book and after I read it and asked her about it she said “oh yeah it’s super racist and sexist I just liked it because it was set in Florida”.


##### *Modern Romance* by Aziz Ansari
In the words of my friend that lives in Brooklyn: “I feel like I don’t really need to read that because I’m living it”.


##### *Telex from Cuba* by Rachel Kushner
I disliked The Flamethrowers so much that I didn’t finish it, but for some reason I liked this a lot better.  Probably because this was in an exotic setting where I wasn’t as skeptical of the exaggerated stereotypes as I was with The Flamethrowers.


##### *Men Explain Things to Me* by Rebecca Solnit
Rebecca Solnit is one of my actual heroes.  I could not admire her more.  Her essays in Harper’s every two months are my favorite thing to read in the entire world.  That said, there’s not a concise theme to this book, and it was darker than I expected.  Still recommend, but maybe not as much as her essays.


##### *The Left Hand of Darkness* by Ursula K Le Guin
Not the most compelling book but kind of a cool thought experiment about gender and sexuality.  


##### *A Safe Girl to Love* by Casey Plett
Short stories heavily focused on trans and queer women by a writer that is trans herself, which is enough to make me read.  I knew Casey a bit in Portland and I’ll read anything she writes.


##### *The Ten Year Nap* by Meg Wolitzer
I loved *The Interestings* by Wolitzer, and this was pretty great too.  It's just about a different era in life.


##### *Mrs. Dalloway* by Virginia Woolf
Kinda just reading to remember what I read in college.  Wish I still had professors and students reading it with me though.