---
layout: post
title: Doing Good vs Doing Well in Tech
---

[_Winners Take All: The Elite Charade of Changing the World_][1] by Anand Giridharadas was my favorite book I read this year.  I rarely find non fiction that I love, it's more of a kind of exercise I put myself through for some reason.  It's probably because thought leader people are always reading non fiction, so it's fitting that criticizing the thought leader industry is a theme of my favorite non fiction book in a long time.  _Winners Take All_ ended up describing a lot of things that have bothered me for years about the tech industry that I haven't been able to articulate very well.

A lot of the book is devoted to criticism of what Giridharadas calls "MarketWorld", which is basically the idea that social problems are going to be solved through capitalism.  It's pervasive idea in the tech industry: I can get very rich while doing things that move humanity forward.   Conscious capitalism - Kickstarter, Etsy, [even maybe Blue Apron?][6]. Edtech, Medtech, making money by giving people something they need.  Everyone wins. 

Except of course that's not true in most if not all cases.  The tech industry is currently at it's most powerful and America is at it's most unequal (in a very long time).  Giridharadas only focuses on tech for part of the book, but the anecdotes he shares were very familiar to me and probably you if you work in tech in a major city.  He interviews Justin Rosenstein, founder of Asana, who talks extensively about how he wanted to change the world for the better after getting massively rich as an early employee at Facebook.  To fulfill that ambition he started...a project management software company.  

To be clear, I'm not saying Asana is bad! I actually like it better than every other project management software I've used, but Asana is really just...neutral.  It's not Good, in the sense of people unselfishly doing things that tangibly improve the world for others, but it's not Bad for any reason either (except for maybe it's perpetuating the elite in-club of Silicon Valley, but whatever).  Asana is fine.  And that's fine! Software doesn't have to have a world improving mission.  What is Bad, in my opinion, is the idea that something like Asana is Good.  It's Bad to pretend that by working for profit making, neutral at best tech companies, that we are doing Good.  We are not.  If you want to do Good, go volunteer at a non profit, or better yet work there full time.  Give your time and energy and money to non profits and poor people, and spend your time and energy and money on political candidates that will help poor people.   

You might be asking: why rain on Justin Rosenstein and Asana's parade? Why can't we use lofty social justice language about a for profit project management software company?  Many people at startups do devote their lives to these companies after all.  I think the other tech focused anecdote in _Winners Take All_ about a startup called [Even][2] helps show why this language is problematic.  Even's pitch is basically helping you save by spreading out your paychecks evenly (get it?), which is a way to avoid the spiky, inconsistent income sometimes associated with hourly jobs and the gig economy.  But the thing is: Even is _charging for their service_.  It is taking a problem of people not having enough money by...taking some of that already limited money.

Notably, Even's largest customer appears to be [Walmart][3].  Walmart is covering part of the cost of Even for employees, but not all of it.  Walmart employees [on reddit do not appear to be fans][4] of the app, and one makes the obvious point that instead of helping pay for Even, Walmart just giving ["employees consistent hours would work much better".][5]  Jon Schlossberg, the CEO of Even, acknowledges that he's not solving a root problem in many user's lives:

> “A Careerbuilder survey that came out a while ago said 78% of workers live paycheck to paycheck,” he said. “That’s an insane number. And it represents people making all the way up to $148,000 a year.”  The real problem, Schlossberg said, is that incomes have remained steady while the costs of housing, education and healthcare have multiplied.  “In America, we have very high interest rates on our student loans, so you saddle yourself up with this debt that cancels out your income growth,” he said.

Schlossberg's diagnosis of the problem is correct, but again, his company is _taking money from the people that are already struggling_.  He's arguably making a bad problem worse, and he uses the language of social justice to describe it.  And this happens all the time in tech!  I went through a job search earlier this year and interviewed at a company that pitched itself as helping people with credit card debt.  After I did a phone screen, it became very apparent that the company was basically serving as a debt middleman that didn't really give people anything except an app with nice visualizations of how desperately in debt they were.  Oh, and it charged for that service, which of course makes people's debt problems worse.

Working at a for profit tech company is not necessarily bad.  It's rarely Good though, and I suspect a lot of tech workers know this.  That's why both companies and employees love to describe their companies as socially conscious, mission driven, whatever else.  We didn't create capitalism, but I would suggest that maybe just being honest about our industry and our jobs is a good way to building an actually more conscious industry.  If we're more honest about what the companies in our industry our doing, maybe there will be more good news like [Amazon instituting a $15 minimum wage][8], or [Microsoft employees denouncing their companies relationship with ICE][9], or even more Edward Snowdens.

Vinod Khosla, a very successful venture capitalist, illustrates the contradiction well in his interview with Giridharadas for _Winners Take All_.  He acknowledges that we need wealth distribution and improved social services in order to prevent social unrest (yes he really does casually acknowledge the possibility of violence due to the current levels of inequality).  He even says he would be willing to pay higher taxes to support such a system.  But in the meantime guess what? He just [helped lead a $40 million Series B in Even][7].  Everyone wins.

[1]: https://www.penguinrandomhouse.com/books/539747/winners-take-all-by-anand-giridharadas/9780451493248/
[2]: https://www.even.com/
[3]: https://www.americanbanker.com/news/walmarts-pay-advance-app-even-used-by-200-000-employees
[4]: https://www.reddit.com/r/walmart/comments/7klh32/the_new_walmart_even_app_could_ruin_your_life/
[5]: https://www.reddit.com/r/walmart/comments/7klh32/the_new_walmart_even_app_could_ruin_your_life/drfmk3f/
[6]: https://www.builtinnyc.com/2017/12/21/nyc-companies-giving-back-1217
[7]: https://techcrunch.com/2018/07/19/even-raises-40m-to-transform-the-working-class-to-the-savings-class/
[8]: https://blog.aboutamazon.com/working-at-amazon/amazon-raises-minimum-wage-to-15-for-all-us-employees
[9]: https://www.theverge.com/2018/6/21/17488328/microsoft-ice-employees-signatures-protest